Support Operator Rupture Dynamics (SORD)

Solver

SORD solves the isotropic viscoelastic wave equation, and includes dynamic
rupture and PML absorbing boundaries.  The mesh is logically rectangular.  The
method of Support Operators for constructing the spatial difference operators
is similar to finite elements.

Optimization

All volumetric calculations are vectorized with Fortan 95 array operations or
forall statements.  Course grained profiling for computations, communications,
and I/O, is automatically performed for each time step using the system clock,
and saved for analysis.  Finer grain profiling and tuning was done with the
Portland Group Profiler.

MPI Communications

The topology is rectangular domain decomposition.  Sub-divisions may be in one,
two, or three dimensions.  Communications are synchronous and blocking.  After
initialization, only nearest neighbor communications are required, allowing for
high scalability.  The code has achieved 80% efficiency on 1920 processors on
SDSC DataStar.  Output may call for global collective operations, so must be
chosen with caution.

I/O

Time series output is buffered.  Volume output snapshots, though not buffered,
are typically written only periodically, so multiple steps can be completed
between I/O operations.  Volume input of the mesh and material model, as well
as volume output, use 'level 3' collective MPII/O with MPI derived data types,
thus optimizing performance on parallel files systems such as GPFS.  MPII/O may
optionally be switched off.  In that case, volume I/O is performed with a
separate file for each process.  Parallel HDF5 was considered, but rejected due
to the added level or library dependency on top of MPII/O.  HDF5 headers can be
added in post-processing when needed.

Fault detection

Periodically, statics are taken for the field variables and checked for
overflows and invalid numbers, and if found, the run is halted.  The statistics
are also written to disk for monitoring the run.

Tools used

Totalview debugger
Portland Group profiler

